the beginning is simple to mark. we were in sunlight under a turkey oak, partly protected from a strong, gusty wind. i was kneeling on the grass with a corkscrew in my hand, and clarissa was passing me the bottle - a nineteen-eightyseven daumas gassac. this was the moment, this was the pinprick on the time map: i was stretching out my hand, and as the cool neck and the black foil touched my palm, we heard a mans shout. we turned to look across the field and saw the danger. next thing, i was running toward it. the transformation was absolute: i dont recall dropping the corkscrew, or getting to my feet, or making a decision, or hearing the caution clarissa called after me. what idiocy, to be racing into this story and its labyrinths, sprinting away from our happiness among the fresh spring grasses by the oak. there was the shout again, and a childs cry, enfeebled by the wind that roared in the tall trees along the hedgerows. i ran faster. and there, suddenly, from different points around the field, four other men were converging on the scene, running like me.  i see us from two hundred feet up, through the eyes of the buzzard we had watched earlier, soaring, circling, and dipping in the tumult of currents: five men running silently toward the center of a hundred-acre field. i approached from the southeast, with the wind at my back. about two hundred yards to my left two men ran side by side. they were farm laborers who had been repairing the fence along the fields southern edge where it skirts the road. the same distance beyond them was the motorist, john logan, whose car was banked on the grass verge with its door, or doors, wide open. knowing what i know now, its odd to evoke the figure of jed parry directly ahead of me, emerging from a line of beeches on the far side of the field a quarter of a mile away, running into the wind. to the buzzard, parry and i were tiny forms, our white shirts brilliant against the green, rushing toward each other like lovers, innocent of the grief this entanglement would bring. the encounter that would unhinge us was minutes away, its enormity disguised from us not only by the barrier of time but by the colossus in the center of the field, which drew us in with the power of a terrible ratio that set fabulous magnitude against the puny human distress at its base.  what was clarissa doing she said she walked quickly toward the center of the field. i dont know how she resisted the urge to run. by the time it happened, the event i am about to describe--the fall--she had almost caught us up and was well placed as an observer, unencumbered by participation, by the ropes and the shouting, and by our fatal lack of cooperation. what i describe is shaped by what clarissa saw too, by what we told each other in the time of obsessive reexamination that followed: the aftermath, an appropriate term for what happened in a field waiting for its early summer mowing. the aftermath, the second crop, the growth promoted by that first cut in may.  im holding back, delaying the information. im lingering in the prior moment because it was a time when other outcomes were still possible; the convergence of six figures in a flat green space has a comforting geometry from the buzzards perspective, the knowable, limited plane o the snooker table. the initial conditions, the force and the direction of the force, define all the consequent pathways, all the angles of collision and return, and the glow of the overhead light bathes the field, the baize and all its moving bodies, in reassuring clarity. i think that while we were still converging, before we made contact, we were in a state of mathematical grace. i linger on our dispositions, the relative distances and the compass point - because as far as these occurrences were concerned, this was the last time i understood anything clearly at all.  what were we running toward i dont think any of us would ever know fully. but superficially the answer was a balloon. not the nominal space that encloses a cartoon characters speech or thought, or, by analogy, the kind thats driven by mere hot air. it was an enormous balloon filled with helium, that elemental gas forged from hydrogen in the nuclear furnace of the stars, first step along the way in the generation of multiplicity and variety of matter in the universe, including our selves and all our thoughts.  we were running toward a catastrophe, which itself was a kind of furnace in whose heat identities and fates would buckle into new shapes. at the base of the balloon was a basket in which there was a boy, and by the basket, clinging to a rope, was a man in need of help.  even without the balloon the day would have been marked for memory, though in the most pleasurable of ways, for this was a reunion after a separation of six weeks, the longest clarissa and i had spent apart in our seven years. on the way out to heathrow i had made a detour into covent garden and found a semilegal place to park, near carluccios. i went in and put together a picnic whose centerpiece was a great ball of mozzarella, which the assistant fished out of an earthenware vat with a wooden claw. i also bought black olives, mixed salad, and focaccia. then i hurried up long acre to bertram rotas to take delivery of clarissas birthday present. apart from the flat and our car, it was the most expensive single item i had ever bought. the rarity of this little book seemed to give off a heat i could feel through the thick brown wrapping paper as i walked back up the street. forty minutes later i was scanning the screens for arrival information. the boston flight had only just landed and i guessed i had a half-hour wait. if one ever wanted proof of darwins contention that the many expressions of emotion in humans are universal, genetically inscribed, then a few minutes by the arrivals gate in heathrows terminal four should suffice. i saw the same joy, the same uncontrollable smile, in the faces of a nigerian earth mama, a thin-lipped scottish granny, and a pale, correct japanese businessman as they wheeled their trolleys in and recognized a figure in the expectant crowd. observing human variety can give pleasure, but so too can human sameness. i kept hearing the same sighing sound on a downward note, often breathed through a name as two people pressed forward to go into their embrace. was it a major second or a minor third, or somewhere in between pa-pa yolan-ta ho-bi nz-e there was also a rising note, crooned into the solemn, wary faces of babies by long-absent fathers or grandparents, cajoling, beseeching an immediate return of love. han-nah tom-ee let me in the variety was in the private dramas: a father and a teenage son, turkish perhaps, stood in a long silent clinch, forgiving each other, or mourning a loss, oblivious to the baggage trolleys jamming around them; identical twins, women in their fifties, greeted each other with clear distaste, just touching hands and kissing without making contact; a small american boy, hoisted onto the shoulders of a father he did not recognize, screamed to be put down, provoking a fit of temper in his tired mother. but mostly it was smiles and hugs, and in thirty-five minutes i experienced more than fifty theatrical happy endings, each one with the appearance of being slightly less well acted than the one before, until i began to feel emotionally exhausted and suspected that even the children were being insincere. i was just wondering how convincing i myself could be now in greeting clarissa when she tapped me on the shoulder, having missed me in the crowd and circled round. immediately my detachment vanished, and i called out her name, in tune with all the rest. 
